Hello everyone. I Aswin and my teammate Nikhil will discuss on the case Netchoice LLC against Paxton. This was presented in the state of Texas and went upto the Supreme court.


Before we talk about the case itself, let's consider the underlying Texas law, that is House Bill 20.
Texas house bill 20 was enacted in 2021, and it is related to censorship by online social media platforms.
It prohibits large online platforms from removing and moderating content based on their own viewpoints, unless of course the content is actually illegal under the federal law in which case they have an obligation to take it down.
The law applies to large social media platforms. Large platforms are defined as those that have over 50 million active users in the US in a calendar month.
The law requires these companies to disclose their reasoning and enforces transparency of policies. This would allow the users to exercise the First Amendment using these platforms.


Now going to the case, the parties involved are Netchoice and Ken Paxton. Netchoice is the petitioner that is a group of trade associations representing major social media platforms such as Facebook and Google. They presented the case challenging Texas HB 20. Their argument was that it violates the editorial discretion that was protected by First Amendment and that the law was unconstitutional. The respondent was Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton who defended the constitutionality of the law. The Fifth circuit court stated that the act of censorship itself is "not speech" and hence it is not protected by first amendment, as the platforms act just as carriers of speech, and not the speaker itself. Texas opposed this, stating that the HB 20 law was a legitimate regulation of content.


At the district court level HB 20 was found to likely violate first amendment rights. Judge Pitman emphasized that private platforms retain First Amendment rights similar to newspapers selecting content.​ The court granted a preliminary injunction blocking House Bill 20 and it held the view that moderation and editorial rights are considered protected speech.


At the Fifth circuit court, the opinion diverged from traditional editorial-discretion views, stating that the platforms' actions are not expressing speech. It remanded the case back to the district court, and held judgement that social media platforms are not traditional speakers when moderating content. This allowed HB 20 to be effective temporarily.


Around the same time another case Moody versus netchoice was presented in the state of Florida and the eleventh circuit court. In Florida that existed the Senate bill 7072 which was enacted in 2021. This was similar to Texas House Bill 20 and aimed to limit the ability of social media platforms to moderate content. For this case the Elevennth circuit ruled against the Senate Bill 7072.


Now Nikhil will continue on the supreme court ruling and other implications of the above mentioned cases.